clarify build on docs content and move doc to dag section (#5633)
fishtown-analytics/docs.getdbt.com: website/docs/docs/deploy/artifacts.md

description: "Use artifacts to power your automated docs site and source freshness data." 
---

When running dbt jobs, dbt Cloud generates and saves *artifacts*. You can use these artifacts, like `manifest.json`, `catalog.json`, and `sources.json` to power different aspects of dbt Cloud, namely: [dbt Explorer](/docs/collaborate/explore-projects), [legacy dbt Docs](/docs/collaborate/legacy-dbt-docs), and [source freshness reporting](/docs/build/sources#snapshotting-source-data-freshness).

## Create dbt Cloud Artifacts

While running any job can produce artifacts, you should only associate one production job with a given project to produce the project's artifacts. You can designate this connection in the **Project details** page. To access this page, click the gear icon in the upper right, select **Account Settings**, select your project, and click **Edit** in the lower right. Under **Artifacts**, select the jobs you want to produce documentation and source freshness artifacts for.

> If you don't see your job listed, you might need to edit the job and select **Run source freshness** and **Generate docs on run**.

Author: ```suggestion
```

description: "Use artifacts to power your automated docs site and source freshness data." 
---

When running dbt jobs, dbt Cloud generates and saves *artifacts*. You can use these artifacts, like `manifest.json`, `catalog.json`, and `sources.json` to power different aspects of dbt Cloud, namely: [dbt Explorer](/docs/collaborate/explore-projects), [legacy dbt Docs](/docs/collaborate/legacy-dbt-docs), and [source freshness reporting](/docs/build/sources#snapshotting-source-data-freshness).

## Create dbt Cloud Artifacts

> While running any job can produce artifacts, you should only associate one production job with a given project to produce the project's artifacts. You can designate this connection in the **Project details** page. To access this page, click the gear icon in the upper right, select **Account Settings**, select your project, and click **Edit** in the lower right. Under **Artifacts**, select the jobs you want to produce documentation and source freshness artifacts for.

Author: ```suggestion
dbt Explorer uses the metadata provided by the [Discovery API](/docs/dbt-cloud-apis/discovery-api) to display the details about [the state of your project](/docs/dbt-cloud-apis/project-state). The metadata that's available depends on the [deployment environment](/docs/deploy/deploy-environments) you've designated as production or staging in your dbt Cloud project.

dbt Explorer automatically retrieves the metadata updates after each job run in the production or staging deployment environment so it always has the latest results for your project.

To view a resource and its metadata, you must define the resource in your project and run a job in the production or staging environment. For details on how to set up a job, refer to [set up a documentation job](/docs/collaborate/set-up-doc-job).

<Expandable alt_header="For legacy dbt Docs">
While running any job can produce artifacts, you should only associate one production job with a given project to produce the project's artifacts. You can designate this connection on the **Project details** page. To access this page, click the gear icon in the upper right, select **Account Settings**, select your project, and click **Edit** in the lower right. Under **Artifacts**, select the jobs you want to produce documentation and source freshness artifacts for.

<Lightbox src="/img/docs/dbt-cloud/using-dbt-cloud/project-level-artifact-updated.png" width="70%" title="Configuring Artifacts"/>

If you don't see your job listed, you might need to edit the job and select **Run source freshness** and **Generate docs on run**.
</Expandable>
```

> <Lightbox src="/img/docs/dbt-cloud/using-dbt-cloud/project-level-artifact-updated.png" width="70%" title="Configuring Artifacts"/>

Author: ```suggestion
```

description: "Use artifacts to power your automated docs site and source freshness data." 
---

When running dbt jobs, dbt Cloud generates and saves *artifacts*. You can use these artifacts, like `manifest.json`, `catalog.json`, and `sources.json` to power different aspects of dbt Cloud, namely: [dbt Explorer](/docs/collaborate/explore-projects), [legacy dbt Docs](/docs/collaborate/legacy-dbt-docs), and [source freshness reporting](/docs/build/sources#snapshotting-source-data-freshness).

## Create dbt Cloud Artifacts

> [dbt Explorer](/docs/collaborate/explore-projects) uses the metadata provided by the [Discovery API](/docs/dbt-cloud-apis/discovery-api) to display the details about [the state of your project](/docs/dbt-cloud-apis/project-state). dbt Explorer uses metadata from your staging and production [deployment environments](/docs/deploy/deploy-environments) (development environment metadata is coming soon).

Author: reworded and added a 'dev metadata coming soon' item

> [dbt Explorer](/docs/collaborate/explore-projects) uses the metadata provided by the [Discovery API](/docs/dbt-cloud-apis/discovery-api) to display the details about [the state of your project](/docs/dbt-cloud-apis/project-state). dbt Explorer uses metadata from your staging and production [deployment environments](/docs/deploy/deploy-environments) (development environment metadata is coming soon).

Reviewer: this is a bit confusing. how do we reconcile with the explorer setup section? https://docs.getdbt.com/docs/collaborate/explore-projects#generate-metadata

explorer users don't need to specify which jobs generate the artifacts, just need to ensure the commands are running within some jobs in their environment

Author: ok i've used the same content in the 'generate metadata' section here and removed the 'set up docs job' reference:

how does this look @cafzal :
> [dbt Explorer](/docs/collaborate/explore-projects#generate-metadata) uses the metadata provided by the [Discovery API](/docs/dbt-cloud-apis/discovery-api) to display the details about [the state of your project](/docs/dbt-cloud-apis/project-state). It uses metadata from your staging and production [deployment environments](/docs/deploy/deploy-environments) (development environment metadata is coming soon).

> dbt Explorer automatically retrieves the metadata updates after each job run in the production or staging deployment environment so it always has the latest results for your project &mdash; meaning it's always automatically updated after each job run.

> To view a resource and its metadata, you must define the resource in your project and run a job in the production or staging environment.

> [dbt Explorer](/docs/collaborate/explore-projects) uses the metadata provided by the [Discovery API](/docs/dbt-cloud-apis/discovery-api) to display the details about [the state of your project](/docs/dbt-cloud-apis/project-state). The metadata that's available depends on the [deployment environment](/docs/deploy/deploy-environments) you've designated as production or staging in your dbt Cloud project.

Author: confirm for tech accuracy

Reviewer 2: I might change that last sentence to something like "dbt Explorer uses metadata from your staging and production environments." -- just don't love the "depends on" phrasing here . 

also, dev metadata 🔜

> [dbt Explorer](/docs/collaborate/explore-projects) uses the metadata provided by the [Discovery API](/docs/dbt-cloud-apis/discovery-api) to display the details about [the state of your project](/docs/dbt-cloud-apis/project-state). The metadata that's available depends on the [deployment environment](/docs/deploy/deploy-environments) you've designated as production or staging in your dbt Cloud project.

Author: ```suggestion
[dbt Explorer](/docs/collaborate/explore-projects) uses the metadata provided by the [Discovery API](/docs/dbt-cloud-apis/discovery-api) to display the details about [the state of your project](/docs/dbt-cloud-apis/project-state). dbt Explorer uses metadata from your staging and production [deployment environments](/docs/deploy/deploy-environments) (development environment metadata is coming soon).
```

dbt Explorer automatically retrieves the metadata updates after each job run in the production or staging deployment environment so it always has the latest results for your project &mdash; meaning it's always automatically updated after each job run.

To view a resource and its metadata, you must define the resource in your project and run a job in the production or staging environment. For details on how to set up a job, refer to [add a documentation step to a job](/docs/collaborate/set-up-doc-job).

<Expandable alt_header="For legacy dbt Docs">

> While running any job can produce artifacts, you should only associate one production job with a given project to produce the project's artifacts. You can designate this connection on the **Project details** page. To access this page, click the gear icon in the upper right, select **Account Settings**, select your project, and click **Edit** in the lower right. Under **Artifacts**, select the jobs you want to produce documentation and source freshness artifacts for.

Reviewer: good clarification - specifying an artifacts job is only needed for the legacy docs, not explorer

<Lightbox src="/img/docs/dbt-cloud/using-dbt-cloud/project-level-artifact-updated.png" width="70%" title="Configuring Artifacts"/>

If you don't see your job listed, you might need to edit the job and select **Run source freshness** and **Generate docs on run**.

<Lightbox src="/img/docs/dbt-cloud/using-dbt-cloud/edit-job-generate-artifacts.png" title="Editing the job to generate artifacts"/>

When you add a production job to a project, dbt Cloud updates the content and provides links to the production documentation and source freshness artifacts it generated for that project. You can see these links by clicking **Deploy** in the upper left, selecting **Jobs**, and then selecting the production job. From the job page, you can select a specific run to see how artifacts were updated for that run only.

</Expandable>

### Documentation

> When set up, dbt Cloud updates the **Explore** link in the navigation so it links to documentation for this job. This link always directs you to [dbt Explorer](/docs/collaborate/explore-projects), where you can view your project's resources and lineage to gain a better understanding of its latest production state.

Author: ```suggestion
Navigate to [dbt Explorer](/docs/collaborate/explore-projects) through the **Explore** link to view your project's resources and lineage to gain a better understanding of its latest production state. 
```

> When set up, dbt Cloud updates the **Explore** link in the navigation so it links to documentation for this job. This link always directs you to [dbt Explorer](/docs/collaborate/explore-projects), where you can view your project's resources and lineage to gain a better understanding of its latest production state.

Author: confirm for tech accuracy

Reviewer 2: `When set up, dbt Cloud updates the **Explore** link in the navigation so it links to documentation for this job.` i would not say this! explorer is always up to date across all the jobs in the environment, so it's not really "documentation for this job" anymore the way legacy docs was.

Author: ok got it! how about:

> Navigate to [dbt Explorer](/docs/collaborate/explore-projects) through the **Explore** link to view your project's resources and lineage to gain a better understanding of its latest production state.

> Note that both the job's commands and the docs generate step ([triggered](/docs/collaborate/set-up-doc-job) by the **Generate docs on run** checkbox) must succeed during the job invocation for the project-level documentation to be populated or updated.

Reviewer: explorer doesn't strictly require docs generate, and the command can also be run manually within a job run step, not just the checkbox. we can just direct folks to https://docs.getdbt.com/docs/collaborate/explore-projects#generate-metadata

> ### Source Freshness

Reviewer: ahh this section/feature is confusing. can we just direct folks to the sources page in explorer by default? like the legacy docs, we're no longer investing in the legacy freshness dashboard

description: "Use artifacts to power your automated docs site and source freshness data." 
---

When running dbt jobs, dbt Cloud generates and saves *artifacts*. You can use these artifacts, like `manifest.json`, `catalog.json`, and `sources.json` to power different aspects of dbt Cloud, namely: [dbt Explorer](/docs/collaborate/explore-projects), [dbt Docs](/docs/collaborate/build-and-view-your-docs#dbt-docs), and [source freshness reporting](/docs/build/sources#snapshotting-source-data-freshness).

## Create dbt Cloud Artifacts

> [dbt Explorer](/docs/collaborate/explore-projects#generate-metadata) uses the metadata provided by the [Discovery API](/docs/dbt-cloud-apis/discovery-api) to display the details about [the state of your project](/docs/dbt-cloud-apis/project-state). It uses metadata from your staging and production [deployment environments](/docs/deploy/deploy-environments) (development environment metadata is coming soon).

Author: @cafzal reworked this page to be much simpler and link to the generate metadata page.a
